[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> The cosmic dance
of spirit and matter,
of transcendence and eminence,
of heaven and Earth, masculine,
feminine, in breath
and out breath.
>> We become part of the
whole and achieve yoga, union.
>> Union consciousness, or
the amalgamation of opposites,
is a foundational force in yoga.
Hatha yoga utilizes
this force of opposites
to create balance and
awaken dormant energy
through breath, postures,
and meditation techniques.
>> Ha is the sun,
Tha is the moon.
To bring those equal and
opposite forces in equilibrium,
in balance, in
harmony is Hatha yoga.
It is one of the ancient forms
of mostly physical practice
part of yoga.
So Hatha yoga includes asana,
pranayama, and meditation.
>> With over 38 million
followers in the US alone,
the physical
postures, or asanas,
of Hatha yoga make it the
most recognizable form of yoga
in the West.
Many beginners are
drawn to the relaxation
and perceived laid-back tone
of the classes over other yoga
styles.
But in India, Hatha yoga
has a very different appeal.
>> I was intrigued to discover
recently that in the West,
Hatha yoga is seen as the easy,
relaxed postural practice.
Because the word
"Hatha" in Sanskrit,
and Hat in Hindi means
force, means hardcore.
It really means hardcore.
>> Hardcore because the union
of prana, energy, and chitta,
mind, is meant to strike
and create friction in order
to generate heat.
>> Power is power.
It's kind of like fire.
You can use it to cook
food or burn down a house.
So the rituals,
they amass power.
>> It's whenever you want
anything more than anything
else in the world, and
you'll do anything to do it,
and you won't stop
until you get it.
That's what Hat means, Hatha.
>> Legs should be straight.
Now extend the right hand,
and then go touch the floor.
>> To begin to understand
Hatha's seemingly dual
personality, it's important
to understand some of its rich
history.
>> My work trying to
contextualize the history
of Hatha yoga looks at the
different traditions and sects
that practiced it.
And received wisdom, received
history of Hatha yoga
is that this sect
called the Naths who
are responsible for all of it.
But actually, there
are other traditions
of yogis that are also equally
responsible for developing
and promoting the techniques
of Hatha yoga in their text.
>> The practices of these
medieval movements offer
scholars clues on
Hatha's origins.
>> As I looked into it, I
realized that the only Sanskrit
text of any relevance to
these holy men, Babas--
and they have various
different names--
that I've been living with in
India are the ones on yoga,
in particular Hatha yoga.
The teachings of
yoga are originally
developed by these renouncers,
these holy men whose lives you
or I can't aspire to emulate,
because they're the yogis par
excellence.
They're practicing
breathing techniques,
sitting down in an
asana, meditating--
that's what they do 100% of
their time, 24 hours a day.
[SITAR PLAYING]
>> These renouncers follow very
closely Patanjali's eight limb
structure, as outlined
in the Yoga Sutras,
the foremost detailed
exposition of all Yogic paths.
>> It's a very systematic
way to recognize the mind,
to purify the mind,
focus the mind,
and then ultimately learn how
to subdue or silence the mind
so we get an expanded awareness
and consciousness when our mind
becomes quiet.
>> So to understand Hatha,
one must have a foundational
understanding of Patanjali's
eightfold path of techniques
designed to train
the body, mind,
and senses for
spiritual evolution.
While there are many ways
scholars reference the eight
limbs, they are simply
illustrated here
as the limbs of a tree that
build on each other for easier
understanding.
>> There have been beautiful,
beautiful books and teachings
on how they actually intertwine.
So I don't want to talk
about them as though they
were necessary states that one
had to go through sequentially
or hierarchically.
But it really does help
to think about them
and learn them like that, that
in many ways, each of the limbs
exists in each of
the other limbs.
Now, as anyone who's ever
tried to build anything knows,
you've got to have a foundation.
And the foundation of yoga
is what Sage Patanjali called
the yamas and the niyamas.
>> These ethical foundations are
laid out in the first two limbs
of Patanjali's eightfold path.
The first limb holds the five
yamas, considered the great,
mighty, and universal vows to
be practiced on all levels--
actions, words, and thoughts.
>> The first skill is to
make nonviolence the baseline
for our decisions.
Then he says, put
every speech act
through the sieve
of truthfulness.
Use your words very,
very carefully.
Do I really need to say this?
How will I say this?
How will my word give honor
to the ultimate existence?
And then the third
practice is not stealing.
How much feeds our greed
instead of our need?
The fourth practice
is brahmacharya,
and brahmacharya takes
two forms in India.
One is for the monks
and the nuns to abstain,
and the other is for
people to commit themselves
in a relationship and to
really honor that other person
as divinity.
And then the fifth vow
of non-possession, or not
take up more than we need.
That gives us a
place of freedom.
>> The next limb, the niyamas,
also has five leaves and are
considered things to
do, or observances.
>> It comes along with
a more positive way,
the second phase of yoga,
which are the niyamas.
And this says purify,
sauca, to clean yourself,
to clean your thoughts, to
be mindful, to eat pure food.
And then santosa-- to
develop contentment,
to say let's appreciate
every morning.
Whether it's a cloudy
day-- we need the rain.
If it's a sunny
day, how beautiful.
And then the third is tapas.
The idea is that it's
the difficulty that
strengthens our character.
Then this leads
naturally into svadhyaya,
a sense of self-cultivation
through study.
The final is isvara
pranidhana-- to have
an idea of something
that is wonderful
and a person that is wonderful,
and as Maya Angelou said,
to work every day at
becoming our best self.
>> The next three limbs are
quite practical in nature,
the first being asana, which
in this context means posture.
>> Where do our problems reside?
They're going to show up in
the body, in the tightness,
in the rigidity, and in some
instances in the over-fluidity.
The moving into pranayama is
the quieting of the breath.
Sit, calm yourself,
breathe, and let
yourself turn inward to move
into that fifth phase of yoga.
And that fifth phase
of yoga is called
pratyahara, which is
that place of inwardness,
to be able to position
yourself to truly move
into a state of holding.
>> The final three limbs
describe a deepening meditative
state culminating in samadhi,
a state of complete absorption
with infinite spirit.
>> The sixth level of
yoga is called dharana,
and it literally means holding.
And these dharanas
build into meditation
where whatever your focus,
we're able to place ourselves
for a sustained period
through the quieting
of the body and the breath.
And that meditation
then informs everything
that we do throughout the day.
So the eighth limb
of yoga is samadhi,
that place of being totally
absorbed, being totally well.
It doesn't matter what you're
doing, but you're present,
and you're in a
place of exuberance.
You have everything
that you need.
And that's yoga.
>> While samadhi is the
aim of all Yogic paths,
it is not easily attained and
can take a lifetime to achieve,
if at all.
So Hatha yoga, as
stated in the sutras,
was meant as a total
life philosophy,
its steady and comfortable
asanas meant as a path
to achieve mastery of the
mind so that self-realization
can be experienced.
>> At least 2,000 years ago,
you start seeing the Buddha
and the Jain saints in Lotus
position and other postures
that provide a kind of steady,
solid base for meditation.
The way yoga is understood
in those early texts
is a way of just completely
stilling the body
and stilling the mind.
So anything that is
uncomfortable can
be held indefinitely
is really not
going to wash in that context.
>> A prime example
of a classic asana,
meant to still the body in order
to still the mind and increase
focus, is the Headstand.
>> Now, there's this notion
central to the first Hatha yoga
text that--
they're all written from
the point of view of men--
that in men, there's this
substance called bindu
which is produced in the head.
And it's constantly
dripping down
and either being
ejaculated as semen
or being burnt up by
fire in the stomach.
And then there are these
various methods of stopping that
from happening.
The most crude, basic,
obvious one is the Headstand.
You use gravity.
If you stand on your
head, then gravity
will stop it from dripping
down and being burnt up.
And the idea is that
in normal people,
it's constantly
being wasted away.
And that's the process that
brings about old age and death.
But yogis can stop that process,
and thereby, often the text
will say, remain immortal.
Through these various practices,
you can achieve enlightenment.
The notion of
something rising up
through the body of
the mystic to the head
is very common to some
kind of mystical ascent.
It's common to all traditions.
And whether you see that
as the breath or the bindu
or kundalini, it's all
just different names
for this notion of sublimation
of a one's existence.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> The transformation into the
modern postures we see today
came much later.
>> When it's first
taught systematically
in the 13th-century texts,
you would do the eight limbs,
and you would do the
Hatha techniques as well.
The texts of Hatha
yoga were first
written down 10th, maybe
11th century CE, AD.
And the by the
14th, 15th century,
that's well-established
in texts.
And from then on, that's
how it's understood.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Around the middle
of the 15th century,
a text was compiled called the
"Hatha Yoga Pradipika," which
means illuminating
the practice of Hatha.
The "Hatha Pradipika"
seems to be
the text which subsequent
writers on yoga and Sanskrit
or on Hatha yoga, that's
the one they refer to.
>> The "Hatha Yoga Pradipika"
followed as a continuum
to the "Yoga Sutras" and became
one of the foremost foundations
of modern yoga, illustrating
the techniques of asanas,
pranayams, and mudra.
So while self-mastery is
the ultimate goal of yogis,
Hatha became the
means to achieve it.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Over the
subsequent centuries,
we do find this huge increase
in the popularity and also
legitimation of the
Hatha Yoga practices.
Up to then, they're
seen as something
that these wild people
are doing on the fringes.
And then the techniques
of Hatha yoga,
these physical
methods predominantly,
get more and more incorporated
in orthodox formulations
of yoga.
So that's the triumph of
Hatha yoga over the 16th
to 18th centuries.
>> These additions of the
more physical postures,
or power asanas, into modern-day
Hatha yoga is what some
consider yoga's breakthrough
to mainstream America and its
body-centric ideals.
>> The body has been
used to assess the mind.
The body is visible.
It's tangible.
We can see, we can sense.
But the mind we can't see.
So movements have been
used to assess the mind.
For example, I have a
hand, and most of the time,
I'm not aware.
But if, in yoga,
I'm told to hold
this hand for three minutes,
I'm totally aware of my hand.
So when I'm aware,
my mind goes there.
So mind and body becomes one.
Instead of me running
around in the world
while I'm sitting
in a Yogic posture,
these have given
me the opportunity
to go deeper into my body.
It has awakened sensations.
It has opened up
my sensory system.
It has opened up my
awareness into myself.
That is the base idea behind
the movement of the body--
so the mind can be
anchored into it.
>> In the Hatha yoga, they also
have purification techniques
of washing of the organs, and
the throat, and the stomach.
But more important is to do
mantras through visualization,
through prayers, through
contemplation, pure lifestyle
and pure food, pure drink.
Slowly, slowly the whole system
becomes pure and purified.
>> When you bring the body
into a balanced state,
it awakens higher
layers of consciousness.
At such moments, the
world reveals itself
as quite a different place.
>> The consciousness is drawn
to higher levels of perception,
gradually bringing an inner
awakening that is more blissful
and more deeply satisfying
than any of the experience that
the mind or the senses or the
ordinary human emotions can
give.
>> From there, you start
being guided by intuition.
You naturally feel more relaxed.
You naturally start
feeling much more at ease,
more fearless, less fearful.
And you're guided.
Effortless action
starts to happen.
And that's where you feel
fulfillment, because then it's
purpose, not your purpose.
There is less and less of you.
So when there is
less and less of you,
then you will be less
manipulative, less stressed.
>> And when you can
slow down your mind,
even that concept will dissolve,
and your consciousness will
merge with the universal
consciousness, we say.
We become part of the whole
and achieve yoga union.
>> When you think about our
tendency to want to work
on aerobic energy, that's the
first thing that gets charged
up is your aerobics--
the heart pumping
up a good energy,
moving the circulation around,
getting the body loosened up.
So the aerobic energy
is an important part
of the body's stimulation.
And we can have buns of steel
and all that good stuff.
But there are
meditations that we
do for 62 minutes that really
have a way of affecting
the gray matter in the brain.
We're learning that the brain
can grow new brain cells.
The science is catching up
with the yoga teachings.
>> Quantum physics
is now giving,
through the lens of science,
what spirituality has been
telling us for
thousands of years,
which is how
interconnected we are.
Pull an end of the
string over here,
and it rattles over there.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
- No one was more influential
in developing the modern Hatha
yoga postures as
T. Krishnamacharya.
As a young man in India,
he immersed himself
in the pursuit of classical
Indian disciplines,
including Sanskrit, the
Indian medicine of ayurveda,
and the study of yoga.
After years of
practice and study,
Krishnamacharya took
to the streets of India
and began demonstrating
the supernormal abilities
of the yoga body on the
belief that to teach,
he had to first gain
one's attention.
- Krishnamacharya brought
wisdom to the threshold
of houses of the people
in the United States.
And even in India, he gave
lots of discourses and talks.
So common man started
moving towards it.
>> But perhaps his greatest gift
to Hatha yoga today is his four
most famous disciples--
Pattabhi Jois, B.K.S.
Iyengar, Indra Devi,
and Krishnamacharya's
son, T.K.V. Desikachar,
who played a huge role in
popularizing yoga in the West.
>> Basically, they all
learned from Krishnamacharya.
That is a fact.
And Krishnamacharya
has got these varieties
which he learned from his Guru.
There is a sequential
order of asanas.
action in the asanas.
And that makes a
difference there.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Just a few decades later,
another influential yogi,
Swami Vishnudevananda, arrived
on the shores of San Francisco.
His book, "The Complete
Illustrated Book of Yoga,"
was to become one of the
most essential guidebooks
of its time and helped further
the popularity of Hatha yoga.
>> Swami Vishnudevananda, who is
a disciple of Swami Sivananda,
he was serving in the
army at that time,
and he happened to go and
visit the Divine Life Society
in Rishikesh.
He said after he
was initiated, he
found he was very
skilled in Hatha yoga.
He was the main Hatha yoga
teacher in the ashram.
And in 1957, 10 years
later, Swami Sivananda
encouraged him to go abroad,
specifically to the West.
He said, people
are ready to learn.
So he basically traveled
to the West on his own
and started teaching yoga in
America, initially in Canada,
and then after that,
moving around the world.
>> Swami Vishnudevananda was
trained in the art of yoga
at the Vedanta Forest
University in India.
He is a missionary who
conducts classes in yoga
nightly in downtown Montreal.
>> Head stand position,
hands in triangle position.
Place the knees, hands firm--
>> Swami Vishnudevananda wanted
to help them develop a yogic
lifestyle.
He said our physical
body is basically
a vehicle for our
mind and our soul.
And even if you're
on a spiritual path,
our first responsibility
is actually
to maintain our physical health.
>> So our theory is you should
not give too much hard exercise
to the muscles so that the heart
will not be affected too much.
Here you may do three
hours or 10 hours
yogi exercises, never feel
any fatigue or tiresome.
You're coming full of energy.
You can do more work
and more contemplation.
>> In 1969, he conducted the
first yoga teachers' training
course in the West.
And today, Hatha
yoga, with its mastery
of the body as a way to attain
a state of spiritual perfection,
is indelibly written
into the hearts
of millions of Westerners.
>> I think people are
appreciating the value of yoga
asanas, pranayama, Hatha yoga.
That's a global phenomenon now.
People are practicing
yoga all over the world
and appreciating the benefits.
And more and more,
people are naturally
taking to meditation
too as a follow-on.
>> With that unitive experience,
that supreme experience,
the realization
that everything--
that God has become everything,
and that internal flash
of understanding of union
with God or experience of God,
the experience that
liberates us and frees us.
Frees us to what?
Frees us to experience the play,
the majesty, the relationship
with the divine.
>> Basically, yoga is understood
by physical practices,
and that is very,
very unfortunate.
People need to
understand yoga begins
with the quality of waiting,
patience, understanding,
acceptance.
Unless we learn to
accept life as a whole,
we haven't learned yoga.
>> Because ultimately,
what is the aim of yoga?
To discover yourself.
It is the path of
self-discovery.
>> In our next episode,
we explore three paths
of devotion--
Bhakti, Karma, and Jnana.
>> It's a traditional system
of teaching and practice
the Margas, and
it's well-described
in the scriptures,
like "Bhagavad Gita."
>> Krishna does advise Arjuna
that he should practice yoga
in order to change his mind in
such a way that he can then go
and fight without
concern for the result.
>> The main idea is to
cultivate selflessness.
That enables us to break out
of the cycles of our own likes
and dislikes.
That's where the
sufferings come from.
>> It's the feeling that
we get when we chant.
While we're doing it, we're
involved in a very intense
spiritual practice.
Every repetition of one of these
names is a seed that's planted.
And that seed will grow.
[MUSIC PLAYING]